paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'Modifications to sicegar: Analysis of Single-Cell Viral Growth Curves'
tags:
  - R
  - time course data
authors:
  - name: Samuel Butler
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Phineus Choi
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Thomas Matheis
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Mira Terdiman
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Johanna Hardin
    orcid: 0000-0001-6251-1955
    affiliation: '1'
affiliations:
 - name: Pomona College, United States
   index: 1
date: 10 November 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
license: GPL-3
---

# Summary

The R package **sicegar** aims to quantify time-intensity data by using sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves.
The method was originally developed in the context of single-cell viral growth analysis (for details, see @caglar2018), and the package name stands for "SIngle CEll Growth Analysis in R". 
In addition to categorizing the best model fit, **sicegar** returns parameter estimates for each of the model fits, providing important information to researchers. 

The sigmoidal function is given as $I(x)$, with parameters estimated using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [@levenberg1944;@marquardt1963].
$h_0$ represents the lower asymptote (as $x$ approaches negative infinity).
$t_1$ is the onset time (the inflection point) and the midpoint between $h_0$ and $h_1$.
$a$ determines the magnitude of the slope of the sigmoidal curve.
$h_1$ is the upper asymptote (as $x$ approaches positive infinity).
The parameters describing the sigmoidal curve in $I(x)$ are graphically represented in **Figure 1**.


$I(x) = h_0 + \frac{h_1-h_0}{1 + e^{-a(x - t_1)}}$


A similar, but slightly more complicated, formula for the double-sigmoidal function is also used for parameter estimation in **sicegar**.
In the original implementation of **sicegar**, the parameter $h_0$ is set to zero for both the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models.

**Figure 1** Visualization of the sigmoidal curve and related parameter values.

![Sigmoidal curve.](images/sigmoidal_curve.png)

**sicegar**'s parameter estimation allows users to extract key model parameters, including the onset time of RNA expression in specific genes [@caglar2018].
Onset time is defined as the time when the half-maximal abundance of RNA is reached in the cell.
For example, @Adams uses **sicegar** to investigate the onset time of RNA expression from genes in *E. coli* undergoing stress. 
Accurate estimates of $t_1$ are crucial for understanding transriptional timing of genes. 
However, @Adams observed limitations in **sicegar**'s fits, which motivated the package improvements proposed in our paper. 


We have substantially modified **sicegar** (our work is currently implemented on CRAN) to improve the parameter estimates for both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models.
Our primary update to the **sicegar** package is the inclusion and estimation of an additional parameter, $h_0$, the lower asymptote of both the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves, which had previously been set equal to zero.
Based on simulated data, the free estimation of $h_0$ provides both a better overall model fit (lower SSE) and more accurate parameter estimates than when $h_0$ is forced to be equal to zero. 

# Statement of Need

@caglar2018 discuss **sicegar**'s ability to correctly identify sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves on simulated data.
They report, "Overall, we can conclude that our algorithm results in reliable fits, that it fails gradually with increasing noise levels, and that it is conservative in assessing whether it has correctly identified a sigmoidal or double-sigmoidal curve or not."
The focus of their results is on whether **sicegar** is able to correctly identify sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves on simulated data, not on whether it is able to accurately estimate parameters.
Although they acknowledge **sicegar**'s ability to estimate parameters associated with sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves, they do not report on the accuracy of the parameter estimates.


In dozens of papers that use **sicegar** for modeling time-intensity data, researchers are interested in extracting specific parameter estimates, e.g., midpoints and slopes, because the parameter values represent biologically meaningful information.
@Adams extracted $t_1$ to investigate onset time of RNA expression in genes in *E. coli* undergoing stress.
@wittemeier used **sicegar** to estimate molar carbon assimilation, using **sicegar**'s estimate of $a$ to understand maximum assimilation rate and $t_1$ to extract the point at which maximum assimilation is reached. 
@rajarathinam also used **sicegar** to analyze carbon assimilation and to extract estimates of $a$.
Our addition of $h_0$ to the set of estimated parameters greatly improves **sicegar**'s ability to provide accurate parameter estimates (note, if one parameter is wrong it impacts the entire fit of the model).
Though the categorization of the model as sigmoidal or double-sigmoidal is hugely important, it is not the only important aspect of the **sicegar** modeling.
Our updated implementation, which includes the estimate of the lower asymptote, is prevailingly important, and thus our adjustments fit the needs of current research. 

# Research Impact Statement

**sicegar** has been a useful tool which has had substantial research impact since its initial release.
The original paper [@caglar2018] on **sicegar** has been cited more than 50 times (Google Scholar, January 2026).
The flexibility of the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models make the model fitting applicable to many different types of data and systems.
The publications which cite **sicegar** range from molecular biology [@anderson2021] to linguistics [@pouplier2024] to ecology [@ferrenberg2023].
As detailed above, many of the publications go beyond the original intent of the package (does the model fit?) to needs for specific parameter estimates (our update to the package).
**sicegar** has been downloaded from CRAN 35,957 times (as of January 2026).


# Software Design

`fitAndCategorize`, the umbrella function in **sicegar**, takes time-intensity data as an argument and runs the data through a series of nested functions.
The process is outlined in **Figure 2**.
First, the data are normalized in the function `normalizeData` (1).
Then they are passed through `multipleFitFunction` (2) which uses the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [@levenberg1944;@marquardt1963] to fit both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves to the data, (3), (4).
Additional parameters are estimated using `parameterCalculations`, and the model is visualized using `figureModelCurves`.
The user decides whether to allow the function to estimate $h_0$ using the argument `use_h0 = TRUE` in `fitAndCategorize`. 
If `use_h0` is set to `FALSE` (the default, for backward compatibility), the algorithm will run **sicegar** using the original implementation, with $h_0$ fixed at zero.
If the user chooses to estimate $h_0$, the same function flow is followed, and each sub-function will account for the estimate of $h_0$.

### Novel Contributions

Each function in **sicegar** was rewritten to include the parameter $h_0$. 
Our new version is outlined in the right-hand branch of **Figure 2**.

**Figure 2** Structure of the `fitAndCategorize` function.

![Structure of the `fitAndCategorize` function.](images/h0_alg.png)

### Example

To demonstrate the difference between the functionality when $h_0 = 0$ versus when $h_0$ is freely estimated, we present a small simulation based on sigmoidal data.
The parameters in our simulation are $h_0 = 2$, $h_1 = 4$, $a = 1$, and $t_1 = 12$.
At each of nine time points on the x-axis, we have five of replicates around the sigmoidal model with normal noise (centered at 0, standard deviation of 3).

**Figure 3** Parameter estimates from simulated data.

![Parameter estimates from simulated data.](images/param_est.png)

For each of 200 simulated sigmoidal datasets, **Figure 3** shows the parameter estimates for each of the four parameters given in $I(x)$, see **Figure 1**.
The red vertical line indicates the value of the parameter used for data generation.
It should be noted that allowing $h_0$ to be freely estimated provides both more accurate parameter estimations — notably for $t_1$ — and better categorizations of the model (as "sigmoidal" rather than "ambiguous").
Similar results occur when the package is run on simulated data with more noise, as well as on data simulated from the double-sigmoidal model. 
Our simulation does not prove that estimating $h_0$ freely is always preferable, but it does indicate that there are circumstances in which estimating $h_0$ is important for full approximation of the model.

# Availability

The **sicegar** package is available on CRAN (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=sicegar) and GitHub (https://github.com/hardin47/sicegar).
Documentation, including vignettes and examples, is provided to facilitate adoption.

# AI usage disclosure

No generative AI tools were used in the writing of this manuscript or the preparation of supporting materials.
The original version of the software was created by @caglar2018, and we did not use generative AI in our update / expansion of the software.
Generative AI was used to debug code and to clarify theoretical mathematical concepts along the way.

# Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge Dan Stoebel for bringing the application to our attention and Federica Domecq Lacroze for sharing her explorations of the **sicegar** package.
PC, TM, and MT were supported by the Pomona College SURP program, and SB was supported by the Kenneth Cooke Summer Research Fellowship. 
JH was supported in part by NIH GM112625.






# References

Commit message:

adding the state of the field section

paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'Modifications to sicegar: Analysis of Single-Cell Viral Growth Curves'
tags:
  - R
  - time course data
authors:
  - name: Samuel Butler
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Phineus Choi
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Thomas Matheis
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Mira Terdiman
    affiliation: '1'
  - name: Johanna Hardin
    orcid: 0000-0001-6251-1955
    affiliation: '1'
affiliations:
 - name: Pomona College, United States
   index: 1
date: 10 November 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
license: GPL-3
---

# Summary

The R package **sicegar** aims to quantify time-intensity data by using sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves.
The method was originally developed in the context of single-cell viral growth analysis (for details, see @caglar2018), and the package name stands for "SIngle CEll Growth Analysis in R". 
In addition to categorizing the best model fit, **sicegar** returns parameter estimates for each of the model fits, providing important information to researchers. 

The sigmoidal function is given as $I(x)$, with parameters estimated using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [@levenberg1944;@marquardt1963].
$h_0$ represents the lower asymptote (as $x$ approaches negative infinity).
$t_1$ is the onset time (the inflection point) and the midpoint between $h_0$ and $h_1$.
$a$ determines the magnitude of the slope of the sigmoidal curve.
$h_1$ is the upper asymptote (as $x$ approaches positive infinity).
The parameters describing the sigmoidal curve in $I(x)$ are graphically represented in **Figure 1**.


$I(x) = h_0 + \frac{h_1-h_0}{1 + e^{-a(x - t_1)}}$


A similar, but slightly more complicated, formula for the double-sigmoidal function is also used for parameter estimation in **sicegar**.
In the original implementation of **sicegar**, the parameter $h_0$ is set to zero for both the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models.

**Figure 1** Visualization of the sigmoidal curve and related parameter values.

![Sigmoidal curve.](images/sigmoidal_curve.png)

**sicegar**'s parameter estimation allows users to extract key model parameters, including the onset time of RNA expression in specific genes [@caglar2018].
Onset time is defined as the time when the half-maximal abundance of RNA is reached in the cell.
For example, @Adams uses **sicegar** to investigate the onset time of RNA expression from genes in *E. coli* undergoing stress. 
Accurate estimates of $t_1$ are crucial for understanding transcriptional timing of genes. 
However, @Adams observed limitations in **sicegar**'s fits, which motivated the package improvements proposed in our paper. 


We have substantially modified **sicegar** (our work is currently implemented on CRAN) to improve the parameter estimates for both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models.
Our primary update to the **sicegar** package is the inclusion and estimation of an additional parameter, $h_0$, the lower asymptote of both the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves, which had previously been set equal to zero.
Based on simulated data, the free estimation of $h_0$ provides both a better overall model fit (lower SSE) and more accurate parameter estimates than when $h_0$ is forced to be equal to zero. 

# Statement of Need

@caglar2018 discuss **sicegar**'s ability to correctly identify sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves on simulated data.
They report, "Overall, we can conclude that our algorithm results in reliable fits, that it fails gradually with increasing noise levels, and that it is conservative in assessing whether it has correctly identified a sigmoidal or double-sigmoidal curve or not."
The focus of their results is on whether **sicegar** is able to correctly identify sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves on simulated data, not on whether it is able to accurately estimate parameters.
Although they acknowledge **sicegar**'s ability to estimate parameters associated with sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves, they do not report on the accuracy of the parameter estimates.


In dozens of papers that use **sicegar** for modeling time-intensity data, researchers are interested in extracting specific parameter estimates, e.g., midpoints and slopes, because the parameter values represent biologically meaningful information.
@Adams extracted $t_1$ to investigate onset time of RNA expression in genes in *E. coli* undergoing stress.
@wittemeier used **sicegar** to estimate molar carbon assimilation, using **sicegar**'s estimate of $a$ to understand maximum assimilation rate and $t_1$ to extract the point at which maximum assimilation is reached. 
@rajarathinam also used **sicegar** to analyze carbon assimilation and to extract estimates of $a$.
Our addition of $h_0$ to the set of estimated parameters greatly improves **sicegar**'s ability to provide accurate parameter estimates (note, if one parameter is wrong it impacts the entire fit of the model).
Though the categorization of the model as sigmoidal or double-sigmoidal is hugely important, it is not the only important aspect of the **sicegar** modeling.
Our updated implementation, which includes the estimate of the lower asymptote, is prevailingly important, and thus our adjustments fit the needs of current research. 

# Research Impact Statement

**sicegar** has been a useful tool which has had substantial research impact since its initial release.
The original paper [@caglar2018] on **sicegar** has been cited more than 50 times (Google Scholar, January 2026).
The flexibility of the sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models make the model fitting applicable to many different types of data and systems.
The publications which cite **sicegar** range from molecular biology [@anderson2021] to linguistics [@pouplier2024] to ecology [@ferrenberg2023].
As detailed above, many of the publications go beyond the original intent of the package (does the model fit?) to needs for specific parameter estimates (our update to the package).
**sicegar** has been downloaded from CRAN 35,957 times (as of January 2026).

# State of the Field

Base R comes standard with an excellent non-linear least squares solver, `nls()` which uses Gauss-Newton optimization.
`nls()` is good when it works, but often fails [@nash2014]; **sicegar** use the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm which alternates between Gauss-Newton and gradient descent.
Software exists to model logistic curves (similar to single sigmoidal curves) but not double-sigmoidal curves (e.g., **drc** [@ritz2015], **qpcR** [@ritz2008], **nplr** [@commo2025])
Other R packages that specifically support both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal models are no longer supported in recent versions of R; for example, consider **grofit** [@kahm2010] and **ImpulseDE2** [@chechik2009].
**sicegar** models both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves reliably.
We have contributed to the **sicegar** package by extending the parameter space and focusing on parameter estimation, tasks that none of the existing software programs implement.

# Software Design

`fitAndCategorize`, the umbrella function in **sicegar**, takes time-intensity data as an argument and runs the data through a series of nested functions.
The process is outlined in **Figure 2**.
First, the data are normalized in the function `normalizeData` (1).
Then they are passed through `multipleFitFunction` (2) which uses the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [@levenberg1944;@marquardt1963] to fit both sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curves to the data, (3), (4).
Additional parameters are estimated using `parameterCalculations`, and the model is visualized using `figureModelCurves`.
The user decides whether to allow the function to estimate $h_0$ using the argument `use_h0 = TRUE` in `fitAndCategorize`. 
If `use_h0` is set to `FALSE` (the default, for backward compatibility), the algorithm will run **sicegar** using the original implementation, with $h_0$ fixed at zero.
If the user chooses to estimate $h_0$, the same function flow is followed, and each sub-function will account for the estimate of $h_0$.

### Novel Contributions

Each function in **sicegar** was rewritten to include the parameter $h_0$. 
Our new version is outlined in the right-hand branch of **Figure 2**.

**Figure 2** Structure of the `fitAndCategorize` function.

![Structure of the `fitAndCategorize` function.](images/h0_alg.png)

### Example

To demonstrate the difference between the functionality when $h_0 = 0$ versus when $h_0$ is freely estimated, we present a small simulation based on sigmoidal data.
The parameters in our simulation are $h_0 = 2$, $h_1 = 4$, $a = 1$, and $t_1 = 12$.
At each of nine time points on the x-axis, we have five of replicates around the sigmoidal model with normal noise (centered at 0, standard deviation of 3).

**Figure 3** Parameter estimates from simulated data.

![Parameter estimates from simulated data.](images/param_est.png)

For each of 200 simulated sigmoidal data sets, **Figure 3** shows the parameter estimates for each of the four parameters given in $I(x)$, see **Figure 1**.
The red vertical line indicates the value of the parameter used for data generation.
It should be noted that allowing $h_0$ to be freely estimated provides both more accurate parameter estimations — notably for $t_1$ — and better categorizations of the model (as "sigmoidal" rather than "ambiguous").
Similar results occur when the package is run on simulated data with more noise, as well as on data simulated from the double-sigmoidal model. 
Our simulation does not prove that estimating $h_0$ freely is always preferable, but it does indicate that there are circumstances in which estimating $h_0$ is important for full approximation of the model.

# Availability

The **sicegar** package is available on CRAN (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=sicegar) and GitHub (https://github.com/hardin47/sicegar).
Documentation, including vignettes and examples, is provided to facilitate adoption.

# AI usage disclosure

No generative AI tools were used in the writing of this manuscript or the preparation of supporting materials.
The original version of the software was created by @caglar2018, and we did not use generative AI in our update / expansion of the software.
Generative AI was used to debug code and to clarify theoretical mathematical concepts along the way.

# Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge Dan Stoebel for bringing the application to our attention and Federica Domecq Lacroze for sharing her explorations of the **sicegar** package.
PC, TM, and MT were supported by the Pomona College SURP program, and SB was supported by the Kenneth Cooke Summer Research Fellowship. 
JH was supported in part by NIH GM112625.






# References
